All right, well, it's great to see you all today.
I hope you're having a great day.
I wanna just begin this message by telling you there's no way I'm gonna get through this entire message today.
Usually I have like four pages of notes and I've got 16 pages of notes on Malachi.
So settle in, we're gonna be here a while, folks.
Listen, don't worry.
Well, it's that time of year again, that time of year when men all over the country and women all over the country put their hope in 18 to 22 year olds.
to go out on the football field and win a game for him.
As I did yesterday, and it didn't happen, and I believe there are Christians in Ohio.
I mean, I have to believe that.
But right now, my University of Texas Longhorns are just struggling with that school.
So congratulations to the Ohio State fans.
There are many more than you would imagine out here.
Well, those of you that have been around me very much know that I usually don't eat a whole lot for lunch.
And the reason I don't eat a whole lot for lunch is because I don't want to go back to my office after lunch and have to take a nap.
And it makes me tired when I eat a big lunch.
But when I was in Central Washington and I was pastor in there, I used to go to lunch with the fellow that was the pastor of the Nazarene Church.
And we only had two restaurants in Royal City.
There was a Mexican restaurant and there was a subway.
And that was it.
And so usually we'd go to the Mexican restaurant, and that dude would eat like a 12 pound burrito at lunch.
And I would be like, Floyd, how in the world do you go back to your office after you eat a 12 pound burrito and stay awake and get anything done?
And he was like, well, sometimes I don't.
And that caught me thinking, you know, if you do get caught sleeping at work, what is it that you're supposed to say?
And I found an answer to some of these questions.
The first thing is you could say, well, they told me at the blood bank that this might happen.
You could also say, well, this is just a 15 minute power nap like they raved about and the last time
in the last time management course that you sent me to.
See how far that gets you?
Whew!
Guess I left the top off the liquid paper.
Oh, you know if they have liquid paper anymore.
That's old school.
Bob is, I wasn't sleeping.
I was meditating on the mission statement and envisioning a new paradigm.
Four is, I was doing a highly specific yoga exercise to relieve work-related stress.
Are you discriminatory towards people who practice yoga?
Third, boy, that cold medicine I took last night just won't wear off.
That's true in some cases.
Two, I was testing my keyboard for drool resistance.
That's a good one.
And then of course, my personal favorite, amen.
You know, today we've been talking about the minor prophets and we've talked about how none of the prophets are minor.
They're only called the minor prophets because their messages are relatively short in comparison to scrolls like Isaiah and those kinds of things.
And today we're in the last one.
The 12.
And we're in the last one there today, Malachi.
And after Malachi, there is silence in the land for 450 years.
And Malachi, it takes place and it's written, we're gonna talk about this just a second, but it's written at a time when the Jews simply had fallen asleep at the wheel.
I mean, they had simply begun to take God's love and God's mercy and God's grace for granted.
And as a result, they started to doubt God's love for them.
And you know, all of us have been in situations in the past.
And if you haven't, you probably will be at some point where you've been tempted to doubt God's love.
So let's take a look a little bit at Malachi's background.
First of all, if you want to look, if you want to whip out some Bible trivia this Thanksgiving, which is coming up way sooner than what we can possibly imagine, if you want to think about it, you could just say that Malachi means my messenger.
Now the result of the fact that the prophet's name is Malachi and that Malachi means my messenger.
Some biblical scholars say that is simply a title that we don't know who actually wrote the book of Malachi.
Some people say it was Ezra.
Other people say it could have been a man named Malachi.
But one thing that's interesting is all of the prophets would have identified themselves as Malachi.
Because all of the prophets had a message.
But in order to keep things simple, and what I believe is this is a proper noun here, and that the prophet's name is actually Malachi.
Our names that we give people don't generally mean, necessarily mean a whole lot, but in the Hebrew culture, the name that you were given meant a lot.
And so it's not inconceivable that someone would be named Malachi.
And then at this time,
Right, we'll think about what's going on in the nation.
The Jewish people are divided into two nations.
Originally, of course, there were 12 tribes of Israel.
Each tribe descended from a son of Jacob, who was also named Israel.
And these tribes, much to the chagrin of God and all of us in the current day, God said, you don't want a government.
And they said, yes, we do.
The God said, you don't want a king.
And they said, no, God, we want to be like everybody else.
And we want to have a king.
And let me just say, OK, on the topic of government, that there are a lot of people in the church who seem to be more concerned about which candidate a person might support than they are about the gospel of Jesus Christ.
And all I can say is don't do that.
Right?
I mean,
All human government is not equally evil.
That is true.
However, all human government loves the world more than it loves God.
And so to place your hope in any system of government or in any leader of government is, you got to be real careful about that because you can border idolatry really, really quick.
because there is no such thing as a perfect president.
There is no such thing as a perfect government.
And that's why God said, you don't want one.
And yet we said, yes, we do, yes, we do, yes, we do.
We want to be like everybody else.
And so God gives in and the first king is Saul and then next comes David and then David's son Solomon becomes king.
And after Solomon is the king, there's this huge conflict
in the land over who his successor should be, and 10 tribes band together under one, and they become Israel.
And then there are two tribes that are left who disagree on who the successor should be, and they become Judah.
And for a while, neither Israel or Judah experience any kind of external conflict.
They don't have wars with other nations for a little while, but eventually they do, because they allow evil kings
come and they have moral corruption and the people abandon God.
And you know Malachi is written during a time of relative peace and prosperity and we have to always be careful when we're in times of peace and prosperity because we lose our edge.
We forget our mission.
We start to drift morally and spiritually
oftentimes away from the core message of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
And we assume that God is happy as a lark with us because we don't have any external conflict.
And that can oftentimes be a fatal assumption as it was for the people of Malachi.
The people of both Israel and Judah assume that because they're not at war with anybody, that God approves as the way that they're living, even though they had drifted away into corruption.
and into terrible things and into idolatry and into, in some cases, child sacrifice and other things like that.
And so God sends in the Assyrians and the Assyrians come from the north and they invade and they conquer Israel.
And down in Judah, things are better than they are in Israel, but not by a whole lot.
And so they're not conquered by the Assyrians, but they're certainly oppressed by the Assyrians.
And that in and of itself is an example of the way that God is absolutely sovereignly in control of everything that happens on earth, whether the kings of this earth acknowledge Jesus as Lord or whether they don't.
God still maneuvers kings and people in this world who may not acknowledge him.
However, he is still God and he is still in control.
The Assyrians never acknowledge anything about God.
And yet here in this passage, we see that God clearly moves that nation anyway to do what it is that He is going to have them do.
Whether they acknowledge Him or not, God is in control.
That's a good thing, right?
So they're not conquered by the Assyrians, but eventually in 612 BC, Nineveh falls.
And Egypt comes in and they overpower Judah until the Babylonians defeat Egypt and they conquer Judah.
in 587 BC.
Now Nebuchadnezzar is the Babylonian king at the time.
That's the same Nebuchadnezzar from the book of Daniel.
And after conquering Judah, the Babylonians dispersed these Jews and that began 70 years that they live in exile because God had said that there are consequences for your sin.
In around 520 BC, Babylon falls to King Cyrus
who's the leader of the Persian Empire.
And so you can see it's just one empire after another empire after another empire that God uses as His method of judgment against His chosen people who have run from Him and have turned to idolatry and have turned to false gods and have turned to all kinds of wickedness.
And we're going to see here in a minute all the kinds of wickedness they had turned to.
And so here now we come to the point of Malachi
He's alive about a hundred years after the Jews began to return home.
And so the temple has been rebuilt under Nehemiah, and sure, it's not as grand or as awesome as the previous temple that was destroyed, but yet it's still a really nice temple.
And so it's been rebuilt.
And Nehemiah visions this new Jerusalem, a city that's the center of the kingdom of God in a place where evil and corruption are eradicated.
And none of it is coming true a hundred years later.
Instead, it's replaced with corruption and rebellion and all kinds of evil that's in full force.
One scholar wrote this, he said, the people were discouraged by the hard economic realities of Persian dominance.
Some of the people felt that the Lord did not really love them because of these factors.
Aren't we just like that?
Many Israelites were showing their dissatisfaction with the Lord by bringing defective animals for sacrifices.
Some even went so far as to assert that worshiping the Lord was drudgery and serving God was a waste of time.
And so we see that this moral lapse has occurred amongst God's people and that they're not concerned about the things that God wants them to be concerned about and that the important things are not important.
You know, one of the things I used to start every meeting with at churches that I was the lead pastor at is let's keep the main thing the main thing.
Right?
I would start every meeting.
It didn't matter if it was the finance committee or the building committee or any other kind of committee.
I would say the first thing, the first order of business is let's keep the main thing the main thing.
Because when we start to drift away from the main thing, which is what happens here,
then we find ourselves in all kinds of trouble.
And this is what Malachi's writing about.
And so that's the background of going on, what's going on, but in the book itself, it's four chapters consisting of 55 verses.
And yet it is short in length.
It is quoted very often in the New Testament, so it's an important book.
What makes it unique is it's set up around these disputations where
God asked the people of Israel a question, and then the people respond with an answer, and it's set up like a courtroom scene, and a lot of biblical scholars say malachized the Socrates of the Old Testament because he used the Socratic method when he writes down these disputations, these arguments that God is having with his people, and we find these debates all over the book.
In fact, we see that there are tons of questions in the book.
There are 27 questions that the prophet asks, and he asks those questions in a way so that the people can conclude for themselves what the correct answer to the question is.
In other words, he asks them a question that ought to be an obvious answer, and yet they're still going to debate with him.
So in chapter one,
You see this, Malachi blasts these priests for allowing sacrifices to be presented to God that didn't meet the requirements.
Basically, the people were apathetic in their worship.
They just showed up at church on Sunday, if we put it in a modern context, not necessarily with God being the foremost in their mind, not necessarily with the joy that comes with fellow shipping with other believers, not necessarily
the joy that can come with singing hymns and praises to God, rather they just came because that was the thing to do.
And even though they went through the doors, their hearts were still far away from where they needed to be.
You know, every Sunday, and I don't do this as often as I should, and maybe, maybe some of you do, but every Sunday we ought to do a heart check before we even come into the doors of the church, right?
because God wants to speak to us.
He wants to speak to you.
He wants to speak to me.
But I have to come through with an open heart and an open mind willing to see and hear what it is that God has for me.
Rather than just coming in thinking, oh, here we go again, it's Sunday.
So I guess the thing to do is go to church.
No, are you kidding me?
I mean, it is a privilege to be able to come into God's house.
It is a privilege.
to be able to worship the king and the ruler of the universe.
It is a privilege to be able to share prayer requests with your friends and neighbors.
This place ought to get you excited.
Right?
In chapter two, Malachi rebukes the priests for their teaching.
He warns them that God is going to curse them because their teaching is causing the people to stumble.
It is a mighty thing to stand before a group of people and say, thus say it the Lord.
And these priests were derelict in their duty.
And then there's a marriage crisis amongst the people of God that's also a spiritual crisis.
He talks to them about how many of the men are divorcing their wives and marrying non-Jewish women.
Now listen, this is not a prohibition against interracial marriage.
There is no prohibition against interracial marriage in the Bible.
What this is is recognizing that the problem is
what Paul said in Corinthians that you should not be unequally yoked.
And this is simply pointing that thing out that if you're a follower of Jesus Christ, it's really important that your spouse is a follower of Jesus Christ.
Otherwise, eventually there's going to be problems.
Eventually there's going to be conflict.
Eventually there's going to be pain associated with that.
And this is simply for our own good.
And if God is paramount in our lives, then obviously we want our spouse, we want God to be paramount in the lives of our spouse as well because we love them.
So this is a religious problem, not a racial problem.
In chapter three, we see that the people have gone in dishonoring God.
They accuse God of not being just.
They're robbing God with their finances.
They also decide that the sacrifice that worshiping God requires isn't even worth it.
They're not even trying.
when it comes to worshiping God.
They're just given up.
And yet in chapter three, there is a glimmer of hope.
Some of the people do repent, not all, but a few of them hear Malachi's message and they repent.
And then finally in chapter four, he mentions the coming day of the Lord, the day when God is going to destroy all who oppose him and establish his kingdom.
But before this day, he sends this prophet
So what is it that you and I can learn from Malachi?
What is it that God wants to teach us from Malachi?
And the first thing is that God's love is sovereign and undeserved.
Look at the very first in Malachi chapter one, verses two through five.
He says, I have loved you, says the Lord, but you say, how have you loved us?
I mean, that is an astounding statement right off the bat.
God says, I have loved you.
And the people say, oh yeah, prove it, God.
How have you loved us?
Not thinking, apparently, they had a brain lapse, right?
Like we often have.
Not thinking, oh gee, I don't know, maybe because I chose Jacob and not Esau.
And maybe because I
pulled you out of bondage to the Egyptians.
Remember the Exodus thing that happened and remember how I parted the Red Sea.
Remember how I spoke to Moses and gave him the Ten Commandments and how I kept sending prophet after prophet after prophet towards you.
I kept not giving you the things that you deserved because I had mercy on you over and over and over again and yet the people had the nerve to say, how have you loved us?
And so God answers this and he says, yet I have loved Jacob, but Esau, I have hated.
I have laid waste his hill country and left his heritage to jackals of the desert.
If Edom, who are the descendants of Esau says, we are shattered, but we will rebuild the ruins.
The Lord of hosts says, they may build, but I will tear down and they will be called the wicked country and the people with whom the Lord is angry forever.
your own eyes shall see this and you shall say, great is the Lord beyond the border of Israel."
Now listen, this passage here gives us a little heartburn, if we're honest, because it is seemingly disturbing that he says, yet I have loved Jacob, but Esau, I have hated.
That's a jarring thing to read when the New Testament says God is love.
And so what is going on here?
Well, remember a few things.
Number one is this is demonstration of undeserved grace and mercy toward Jacob.
Right before they're even born, God decides Jacob is going to be the one through whom I
build my line leading up to the Messiah.
Jesus is coming.
Jacob is going to be, his descendants are going to be my chosen people.
And he determines that before Jacob and Esau are ever even born in Genesis.
And therefore how did, what did Jacob do to earn the favor of God?
He did absolutely nothing.
He wasn't even born yet.
And yet he earned it.
He got God's love, undeserved mercy, undeserved selection.
Again, the Bible teaches that those whom God forek knew He has predestined to become children of God.
There is an element that's undeniable in Scripture that God chooses you to be saved.
There is also an element in Scripture that says it's not the will of God that any should perish, but that all would come to repentance.
And so we're left with this dichotomy of on the one hand, the Bible is very clear that God chooses those.
And on the other hand, it says that it's not His will that it is should perish.
And how the two of those things, how God's sovereignty interacts with human free will is the greatest mystery in all theology.
And what I have concluded, because my mind is relatively simple, right?
You know that.
You've been around me.
What I have concluded from that is that if God thought I needed more information, he would have given me more information.
Otherwise, I just have to be content with both of those things are true and how they interact is a mystery.
And that's okay with me.
I can be content with that.
It doesn't change what I do in my everyday life.
I want to go out and share the gospel of Jesus Christ with everybody.
I know I'm supposed to do that.
It's God's job to sort them out.
Remember, I told you that we're in sales, not management, right?
Who is saved as a management question?
Telling people how to be saved is a sales question.
Well, I'm in sales, not management.
And so this is what in this, this Esau I have hated here is a Hebrew idiom that's meant to draw a very clear distinction.
It does not mean
It does not carry the connotation of God hated Esau.
It's simply an idiom that she used to make a very stark contrast between the two.
And so God reminds them, I have chosen you as my people.
Someone has said, Israel needed to consider what her lot would have been if she, like Edom, had not been elected to a covenant relationship with God.
Both Israel and Edom received judgment from God at the hands of the Babylonians, yet God repeatedly promised to restore Israel, because they were holy righteous and did everything that God wanted to do?
No, because he's God, and he keeps his promises.
But he condemned Edom to complete destruction never to be restored.
The Edomites, you can't go to the country of Edom today.
The last really influential Edomite was eventually in the New Testament, they became known as the Edumians, and Herod the Great was the last influential Edomite, and we last saw him when he tried to have all the babies, all the male babies massacred.
And after his death, the Edomites kind of fade away into history, almost never to be seen or heard from again.
God wants these people to consider how hopeless they would be
without his great love.
Man, that's something that we ought to consider, isn't it?
I mean, sometimes we ought to consider what would my life be without God's great love?
Because I think that the one thing that every single person on this planet needs, and it doesn't matter if you're in Uganda or Kenya or Ukraine or Russia or here, every person on this planet needs hope.
and hope that's real hope is only found in the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Their hope is in the fact that God loves them and he has promised never to stop loving them.
And my friends, our hope is in the truth that despite myself, God loves me because he has promised to love me.
And because he is faithful and just and true and pure and I am not, then God's, God upholds me.
He loves me because of his great character.
And because God is a God of great character, when I get ready to die and leave this world and I slip the bounds of this place and go to heaven, I know I'm going to get there, not because Lance is a good dude, but because God is merciful, gracious, and he has said he loves me.
And because he cannot lie, then my future is safe, set, and secure.
And so is yours.
One day, the people will recognize the greatness of God and His love for them.
God's great love, it is said... God's great love, it is said...
Oh.
Well.
All right.
John Piper wrote this.
I think it's really great about the recognition of God's love in our life.
God's love, he said, should make us tremble with tears of joy knowing that we belong to this great God.
He said, if we
If we honestly assessed our life, how should it impact our lives?
How should God's great love impact our lives?
And he says this, if we saw the greatness of God's love for us, we wouldn't be so greedy and covetous.
If we saw the greatness of God's love for us, our eyes wouldn't stray after lustful images and thoughts.
If we saw the greatness of God's love for us, we wouldn't get angry at our children.
So easily.
If we saw the greatness of God's love for us, we wouldn't pout and get hurt so easily in our marriages.
If we saw the greatness of God's love for us, we wouldn't worry about our look so much.
I haven't ever done that.
It's weird.
If we saw the greatness of God's love for us, we wouldn't get so discouraged with the evil
and godlessness of our own culture.
God's love can totally transform us.
The next thing that we get from Malachi is we get a message to honor the Lord.
In Malachi chapter one, verses six through 11, it says, a son honors his father and the servant, his master.
If them, if then I am a father, where is my honor?
And if I'm a master, where is my fear?
Says the Lord of hosts to you.
O priest who despised my name, but you say, how have we despised your name?
Again, clueless.
They know exactly what they're doing, but they're still trying to argue, how have we despised your name by offering polluted food upon my altar?
But you say, how have we polluted you?
by saying that the Lord's table may be despised.
When you offer blind animals and sacrifice, is that not evil?
And when you offer those who are lame or sick, is that not evil?
Present that to your governor.
Will he accept you or show you favor?
Says the Lord of hosts.
I mean, throughout this book, there's all these questions and asking questions is not a bad thing, but these questions are defensive questions.
They're defiant questions.
They're like a child who constantly says, why?
when they don't want to do what it is that their mom or dad is asking them to do.
And they just say, why?
Why?
All the time.
In verse six, Israel's not honoring God.
That word honor means glory.
God deserves glory and honor.
The Lord says, just like a son honors his father and his servant and his master and a citizen, his governor.
So we are to honor the Lord.
I mean, if your favorite,
I was going to say presidential candidate, but I don't know.
We got to aim higher than that.
If your favorite college football coach came over to your house, right?
I mean, to me, that's more important than the president anyway.
But if your favorite college football coach came over to your house to sit down and have a meal with you, would you whip out the leftovers?
No.
Would you put it on paper plates?
You would set the best table, right?
Whoever it is that you give honor to, you would set the best table, you would honor him.
And here are the priests not honoring God when they said, you know, when they offer these unlawful sacrifices for atonement.
Deuteronomy 15, 21 says, but if it has any blemish, if it is lame or blind or has any serious blemish, whatever, you shall not sacrifice to the Lord your God.
And so the people literally knew that it was not a pure, clean, holy sacrifice.
They knew that it was a cheap, half-hearted way to worship God.
They were basically saying, oh man, you know what?
If we have to do this, let me go out and find the most blemish, worst animal, the cheapest animal,
I can possibly find the one who is going to give me nothing in return and I'll honor that.
I'll honor God with that.
Then he says, God says, and now entreat the favor of God that he may be gracious to us.
Was such a gift from your hand?
Will he show any favor to any of you?
Says the Lord of hosts.
In other words, God is not the cosmic chump.
He knows whether our hearts are bent towards honoring Him and glorifying Him, or whether they are bent toward anything else but that.
Oh, that there were one among you who would shut the doors that you might not kindle fire on my altar in vain.
I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of hosts, and I will not accept an offering from your hand.
God is saying, I wish somebody had the courage
to just go shut the doors of the temple and not let anybody in.
I would rather them not worship me at all than I had him bring me these kind of lame sacrifices that they're bringing.
That would actually honor me."
In verse 11, he says, from the rising of the sun to its setting, my name will be great among the nations.
And in every place incense will be offered to my name and a pure offering for my name will be great among the nation says the Lord of hosts.
Listen, God will not be mocked.
His name is great.
And God says to them, if you won't honor me, others will, right?
It's a privilege to live your life devoted
to honoring and glorifying God.
It is an absolute privilege and it is the highest call in our lives.
So real quick, what do we learn from this?
Well, the first thing is is that we make a connection to the gospel.
The pure and healthy animal that they had to sacrifice reminds us of the gospel.
God ultimately was the one who was going to provide the unblemished
Lamb, the perfect Holy Son of God.
There is an illusion here to John the Baptist.
John chapter 1 verse 29 says, Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.
This is when John the Baptist sees this unblemished sacrifice and he knows Jesus is the one.
He is the chosen one.
He is the perfect one.
The gospel demands this.
That's why we need Jesus to save us because we are blemished.
We have spiritual flaws.
We're sinners, but Christ is pure.
And so one important application is to rejoice that Christ is the perfect sacrifice because our lives depend on it.
The second thing is we're to honor the Lord wholeheartedly.
We don't honor God with sacrifices of animals anymore.
But Romans chapter 12 verse 1 says,
I appeal to you, therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your spiritual act of worship."
Right?
God says, listen, bring me your whole body as an act of worship.
And so what is our life?
Well, our life is somewhat of our lives is our time.
You know, we offer God time.
We don't selfishly manage our time only for ourselves.
Even our free time belongs to God.
And God certainly deserves more than the leftover time that we often bring to Him.
We often say, God, you know, I'll have my quiet time if I get absolutely everything else done today.
And I happen to be left with two minutes at the end of the day.
I'll give you those two minutes.
That's the same thing as saying, God, I brought this blind lame cow to you for sacrifice.
Now he is worth better than that.
We offer him our careers.
We don't selfishly seek our own fame.
Right?
We submit our jobs to him.
We recognize that he is our ultimate boss.
He is our Lord.
that we answer to Him ultimately.
And so whatever it is that you do for a living, whether it's being retired or, you know, and being able to serve other people and having time to be able to be involved in ministries, or whether you're still actively working, you are working for your boss.
But as a Christian, you are ultimately working as unto the Lord.
And so honor the Lord with everything that you do in your job.
Treat people in your job the way that God wants you to treat people in your job.
I want to ask the ushers to come forward and start to pass out the elements today for communion.
Listen, whatever it is that God has called you to do, He calls people to be teachers.
He calls people to be accountants.
He calls people to be plumbers, electricians.
He does not just call people to be pastors and missionaries.
His call goes far beyond that.
And so wherever it is that you find yourself, that is your mission field.
You know, I used to have a guy that led music for a church one time when I was pastor in there and he owned some kind of a business.
I can't remember what it was now, but he came in one day and he said, well, I have business Carl and then I have church Carl.
And he said, I like to keep those two things separate.
And I said, well, that's a huge mistake.
You can't keep business Carl separate from church Carl.
If you think that God cares, if you're ripping people off in your business and then you show up at church on Sunday and you put on church Carl and you think God is happy with you, then like George Strait said, I've got some oceanfront property in Arizona, I'd like to sell ya.
It's not the way it works.
The gospel permeates all of our lives.
It permeates every single relationship.
And finally, our money.
God doesn't need our money, right?
He is not impoverished.
However, God does know that our money is tied to our hearts.
And therefore, we can be generous with other people in need, that we're not supposed to be cheap or stingy.
that in response to this glorious salvation that God has for us, that we are to offer a whole lives to him in worship and to bring him honor and glory and majesty that only he is due.
And so for a moment, I want you to just pause and evaluate your life and say, you know, God, I love you.
Think of the ways that God has blessed you as we enter into this time of communion and we celebrate the death and the resurrection of Jesus and the new life that's available.
Take one moment and just think about how God has loved you and take one moment to examine yourself in saying, have I given God my best?